You want me to stop, by the way?
Just, uh, I was deciding you to want me to record.
Just let me know.
I guess I'd like to know when you started collecting anything.
I mean, you're obsessed here.
Clearly, I would say you're obsessed.
Well, it's very interesting, you know.
I started collecting when I got married.
Prior to that.
When was that?
That was 27 years ago.
Okay.
And, uh...
I never thought about acquiring anything until that point in time.
I never thought about collecting anything until that time.
I always trap a light, as most single people do.
My wife was a pack rat.
Leonard Besson says the same thing about his wife.
They collect it as a couple, by the way.
That's wonderful.
And we've been doing the same thing for 27 years.
When I first married her, I mean, she saved everything.
And when we decided we were going on our honeymoon, she opted for Williamsburg, which is the renovation, the restoration.
And we went there.
And I never thought about antiques.
And I caught the disease from her.
It is a disease.
Although I was always interested in art because I do remember that our first date, she lived in Florida but came to New York to open a showroom for an importer who she worked for and who she ran the showroom in Florida and he was opening the showroom here in New York and she was opening it for him and setting it up.
Remember our first date, I took it for lunch at the Metropolitan Museum.
We had always been interested in art, but never thought of these things to own.
This is in the early 60s?
This is in the early 60s, exactly.
We were married in 63.
Thank you.
Yes, please.
And what happened was the... Well, we started going, taking a vacation,
We'd visit galleries.
On our honeymoon, we visited antique shops and galleries.
And I started to purchase a few antique objects.
I remember the first painting that I purchased, I paid that painting off at $50 a month.
And I thought that was a lot of money.
And I remember my wife bringing home her first belter chair.
chair in a little upholstery shop in our town in our village and she promised the fellow that she'd pay him ten dollars a week for the chair and i started looking at this chair and i said my god it's fabulous and that of course was was later on because actually what really happened now that i remember when she brought the chair home at that moment when i saw it i said well
If you want to live with used furniture, that's okay with me.
You know, I've come a long way since then.
But after a while, the chair started to grow on me, and then I started this chair, and then I started reading antique publications, and I saw the belt of furniture, pictures of some belt of furniture going off at some country auctions, which was the kind of stuff you never saw in the big cities.
And I started falling in love with the form,
and the design and the motifs.
And I got hooked on Belter Furniture, and I said one day I'd love to have a house full of this stuff.
And we started hunting for furniture, and we were buying paintings, and we were buying antique objects.
Pardon me for interrupting, but had you already begun this business at this point?
Yeah, I had started Mediators in 1966.
But I'd been in business for myself prior to Mediators in a smaller version of this, so that I was always in business for myself.
The collecting started to really heat up when I got interested in the auction process, and that seemed to substitute my gambling instinct.
Do you like to gamble?
I used to.
I used to love to gamble, but when I started to get involved... Table games?
Table games.
Las Vegas.
Yeah, Las Vegas, yeah.
And now... Interesting.
Yeah, and I stopped.
I had totally no desire to gamble once I got involved in buying art objects and paintings, art objects and antiques and furniture and stuff like that.
A lot of what we bought was at auction.
And that was a tremendous kick.
I still do to this day.
I mean, it's like going... Tension, anxiety.
My heart starts to pound into something I want.
I love it.
It's just the most... It's the most phenomenal... It's a sport.
It's a true sport.
And I go in there, I go in there, ready to do battle.
And I try not to bid on something unless I'm really going to own it.
Because I usually try to get what I go after if I can, without being ridiculous.
But if you go after the best objects in this particular class, if you go after the best object in this particular class, what you've got is a situation where invariably you're going to usually pay more money than what people think is going to go for.
You have to be prepared to do that.
You have to go in with that understanding.
You have to go in with that understanding because the best always commands a premium.
It's just the way life is.
But you never lose with the best.
Never.
And here's another thing.
Do you look at these as investments?
No.
And I think that's a very important point to make.
In fact, I lecture on this.
From time to time.
They asked me, or asked Lori, or there was a lecture in our collection about how we started.
And we've become authorities in certain areas.
What are your authorities?
Well, I guess authorities on American furniture, paintings, things like that.
And when I talk to new collectors, the most important thing I stress
is that you should never buy an object as an investment because he talks to any great collector and they will tell you that they never bought as an investment they bought it because they had to have it they loved it they couldn't live without it it is an investment i mean a priori it's an investment uh but you don't think of it that way good objects will always take care of themselves that's me as a true collector yes
You must never, because there's a process, and no one's been able to scientifically evaluate this, but I believe that there's a process where one is thinking with his head instead of his heart, if he's thinking of an investment.
And the things he's thinking about is what's in this year, what's going to be in next year.
And when you start making those decisions, you invariably set yourself up to make some wrong decisions.
You buy something because you have to have it, because you love it.
You're making a right decision, and the right decision is twofold.
One is right because you love it, you're going to hang it, or you're going to live with it.
And up or down in the price means nothing because you want to have the object anyway.
And I don't know what the answer is, but it's always, it's always, the object always pays for itself.
You also made it certain that scarcely a day goes by when you don't get something.
Is that an exaggeration in some sense?
No, really.
If I'm not buying something, my wife is.
We're always out.
She's in the shops.
I'm walking up and down Madison Avenue.
I'm inundated with catalogs.
Antique catalogs, art catalogs, book catalogs.
Healers call me up all the time.
We're always, I'm always in, in fact, when we come back to the office to look at my desk, we'll see altars of various objects and stuff.
Every day, I would say.
Well, maybe a slight exaggeration, but I would say we must buy four or five hundred things a year.
I don't know.
It's amazing.
Is there a,
Is there a scheme, a grand scheme?
Well, it's a twofold scheme.
It's a twofold scheme.
Satisfying this need to require, I wonder.
Well, it's a... I guess this scheme is twofold.
One, it's the... We're building certain collections.
I'm building a major book collection.
of some of the great high spots in world literature, some of the wonderful high spots in American and English fiction manuscripts.
We're building a collection today of federal furniture, American federal furniture.
We're putting the finishing touches on our American painting collection.
And then we're always buying objet d'art.
I mean, we're always buying little things, big things, just things that strike our fancy.
Do you keep all of these in your home?
Well, a lot of it's there.
A lot of it's in museums.
We have a gallery of the Art Institute of Chicago in our name.
We have two rooms in the Metropolitan Museum.
We have a building at Winnetour.
Started with 60 bucks.
What can I tell you?
When we spoke once on the phone, you mentioned that you have collected so many different things.
You still say that books, you said that books were your first book.
Yes.
It's very interesting.
You recall going down to the 4th Avenue shop.
Yes.
Good memory.
Let's just hold for one second.
We're ordering.
I guess I asked if you're a native New Yorker, right?
Yes, I am.
Born and bred, traveled the world, but New York has always been my home base.
And, you know, you get very provincial.
New Yorkers are very provincial.
You know, it's like a small town in the way.
We never heard that.
Yeah.
And we are pretty set in our ways.
Business opportunities in New York are tremendous.
So I've always stayed here.
But I spent enough time in a lot of other places that I've never felt trapped.
And getting back to your question about books, it's interesting.
Books have always been my first love.
Yet I never thought of putting a book collection together
Because I always bought books, whether retail, new books, or haunted used bookshops since I'm a child.
And never thought of it as a collection, just bought books in used bookshops.
Bought them mainly for their content.
Mainly for their content.
And as a child, a typical Saturday...
As a youngster, I would be going down to the 4th Avenue bookshops.
I lived up in the Bronx at the time, which is quite a ways.
I think the subway into Manhattan, all the way down to Astor Place, which is in lower Manhattan, and then walk up 4th Avenue, hitting all the bookshops.
And then that's pretty close to 14th Street.
and Union Square, where S. Cline's used to be the major discount holder, and then walk from there to Central Park West and 96th Street, which is quite a walk.
You would do this regularly?
Regularly on a Saturday afternoon, and then hit the subway and go back to the Bronx.
How old?
I guess I was 15, 16.
Really?
Yeah.
Did you get many books on these excursions?
Not a lot.
It was more and more.
I love to browse.
I'd love to browse books.
I'd buy a few books.
One or two or three.
Were you looking for anything in particular?
Well, in those days, yeah.
Talk is an opportunity, but in those days, I was really interested in science fiction and fantasy.
There was a renaissance in the early 50s
a science fiction renaissance of course today we're saying there's a science fiction renaissance but the first real renaissance in science fiction was in the early 50s and I remember going to Philadelphia to the Philadelphia chapter to a convention
was one of the early, early conventions.
Today, conventions are a dime a dozen, but this is one of the early important conventions.
And I remember L. Ron Hubbard had just written Dianetics.
And W. W. Campbell, Jr., who was, I think, his brother-in-law at the time, and also the editor of Astounding Science Fiction, was expounding for about two or three hours on how fantastic Dianetics was.
and how involved I was in this pseudoscience.
And I remember Ted Sturgeon, who was one of the great science fiction writers, composed some music for Robert Heinlein's The Green Hills of Earth.
Are you familiar with any of this stuff?
OK.
I'll get away from that.
I guess in my book collecting, I finally decided to collect books in the... about six or seven years ago because I decided to build a house
And have a library in the brand style, which I'd always admired in my travels to antique houses.
And I wanted the spacious rooms, spacious room, the circular staircase.
And I accomplished that.
This is something that you have done.
I have done.
I accomplished that.
And...
Today, my books are housed in this wonderful Georgian-style library.
I hope at some point that you'll allow me to see this.
Yes, of course.
Oh, absolutely.
And let me say, I'll even put this on the tape to reassure you, by the way, this is important.
I will in no way betray the location.
Okay?
This is a concern that people have, and I'm extremely sensitive to it, and very respectful of it.
Thank you.
I mean, I say this on the tape, and some of it is here.
No, I know that.
We had a kidnapping scare with a door.
I mean, you're a native New Yorker and you built the house.
I mean, that's about as far as it goes.
I mean, I'm not going to in no way identify the county or the city or anything like that.
I don't know who's going to be reading my book anyway, but I think I will.
The collection here owns us.
We don't own it.
And you're very restrained.
Wow.
Elaborate on that.
That's a new quote from me.
And does it own you in the sense that you can't move it?
Does it own you in the sense that it also possesses you?
It possesses you, but it also owns you because you're bound to it.
You're bound to your collection.
There are times we can't leave.
If my couple is away, we don't leave the house.
There's always somebody home.
I have the most sophisticated security system imagined.
Yet, there's always somebody in the house.
I never went down at the Gardner this week.
state-of-the-art, right?
Exactly.
But unfortunately, he wants to bust his way in.
The point is, some things might be foolproof, but they're not idiot-proof.
And if you have some clown that's going to open the door to people and he's been specifically told not to open the door to people... Exactly.
I mean, that's tragic.
That's the...
I mean, I'm sick about that.
A garden and museum, to me, is something I'd rather have past the time of the year.
And usually right around now, just before Easter, they bring in all the flowers.
They bring my daughters to see this place.
And I almost, not that you can't, but you almost feel like there's been a rape over there.
There has been a rape, no questions.
They happen to have what, to me, is the greatest Rembrandt painting.
I love that shipwreck.
You see a Galilee and it knocks me out.
I love the Vermeer myself.
It's a great Vermeer.
I mean, there's only 34 of them.
It's like getting a Shakespeare in a way, isn't it?
Yes.
Anyway, we can get sidetracked here as we were talking about.
All off, though, on the...
The collection owns you yourself with respect to the fact that you can't leave it or you can't leave it?
Number one, it's a great responsibility.
You have to worry about taking care of the objects, restoring the objects, serving the objects.
Objects must always be under protection.
Got to be insured.
Very expensive.
Be taken care of by the curator.
You do have a curator?
Oh, yes.
Oh, that's wonderful.
For the books, too?
Well, not really.
And I should, but I'm sort of the curator.
I think books, which is, again, a theory, got a theory in mind, but I think the book collector really is his own.
The book isn't really something that you put on the wall that you can share the beauty with other people.
I think generally, and one thing I had really found when I was out of Bill Scheide's house two weeks ago today, not his house, his library.
He had to go to a dinner party.
He called.
He had his librarian call his wife to say he can be late.
I said, Mr. Charity, please.
He said, no, it's not often you get a chance to share the books.
You know, somebody who knows the books.
Exactly.
I appreciate them as much as I do.
And I'm sitting there with his Gutenberg Bible on my lap.
And I said, really, I'd much rather do this.
He said, no, no, you've got to feel the type.
You have to feel the paperwork.
We're tight to get the paper for the first time in history.
Yeah, I got a little white-headed.
True.
But Leonard Baskin and his wife were the same way.
I was there on a Sunday.
Well, I said, I got to go.
They said, no, no, no, it's not often we have a chance to share our books with people.
So I took books in a way are one-on-one.
kind of, maybe a more of that, but I think that it's a one-on-one thing.
And where you say you have a curator for your artworks and all the others, but the books you kind of take care of yourself.
That's your own pet writing.
Sure.
I guess.
Absolutely.
Is that an assumption?
No, it's my pet writing.
Yeah.
I pet my books.
I find myself petting the books.
One of my questions at one point is, how do you enjoy them?
How do you go about enjoying them?
Aside from reading,
reading them, the pleasure of discovering what I own.
You know, you rediscover it.
If you have a big library, you rediscover things.
And each time I come back to the library, the pleasure of taking the books out, leafing through the volumes,
discovering some nuance.
It's highly pleasurable, and it's something that can only be... How are you doing?
How are you doing?
Everybody who knows you speak very highly.
You know that?
Thank you.
You know, I mean, I talk to people and...
I haven't yet.
I have at least a dozen people who know you, without exception, speak very highly.
Nice to know that you're... Because one never knows how they're perceived by others.
And I would never even have said that if that gentleman hadn't just, you know, validated to know what... Nice.
Let's describe your collection.
You said it's a high-spot collection.
I guess at some point, you said six or seven years ago, it started with the idea of a library.
It's interesting.
Yes.
It was sort of a challenge.
Could I put together an important collection of books?
It's such a late date in my career.
Being that had I started, say, 20 years ago, and I started collecting 20 years earlier, I started collecting other things.
And now I'm thinking to myself that I didn't start at the same time collecting books.
But I think in...
What happens in life is you... It's a time for everything.
Timing... Things happen when you want them to happen.
I'm a firm believer in that.
And I was ready to dive in to truly collecting antiquarian books at this time in my life.
How old are you?
Well, I'm 53 now.
I started collecting, I guess, 46 or so.
And...
If I ask you your age, I have to tell you mine.
No, not at all.
Not at all.
What I've learned in this previous time, when I'm not working, I'm very reserved.
But when I'm working, there isn't anything I won't ask you.
Well, you have to.
You have to be... No, no.
You can't be reserved.
You have to because it's... Yes.
But you're going to put a study together.
But you brought the point up at this point in my life.
Absolutely.
And please understand.
There's nothing that you can't ask me about.
I sincerely mean that.
And all you have to say is no in any business.
I wouldn't be ashamed.
But there isn't before.
No, but there really is nothing that I...
Believe if you're gonna do a study Then you got to do it if you're gonna write a great you're gonna put together a great book about a subject Then you got to do the right thing.
You got to go after it You don't do it right if it comes wishy-washy, you know what I mean, you know, you know what I'm doing I'm trying to do a very good book, but I want you to and I don't want it to be Is that right?
I got to see you after Freeman
Arthur will tell you stories you won't believe.
He's a great, great guy.
Arthur, you'll love him.
I will call him, don't worry.
Just before you came in.
Are you crazy?
Of course I will.
That's very nice.
Just ten minutes before you came in, let's talk to Arthur.
It's got to be a good book, you know.
In fact, you will see, Arthur.
He will be up for the British part of the sale.
I'll be back.
I'm coming back in the 22nd.
That's the 28th, 29th, I think, right?
Yeah, something like that.
21st off, I don't see him.
I will see him.
You don't see him in London.
He'll be in town for at least a week or 10 days.
You'll go to dinner with us.
Thank you.
You're in town, because I'm having dinner with him and his wife, and I'm going to come to dinner with us.
That sounds great.
Absolutely.
That's for sure.
Thanks.
you know who she is she was she was the curator of the shiny collection janet yes she's now janna freeman she's she's bill stoneman's predecessor she'll tell you everything she's the leading authority on
Of course she would be.
She's written a marvelous treatise book on it.
Yeah.
Everybody said I should talk to you.
It's amazing.
Do you have?
Yeah.
Look out for dinner.
I won't let you forget it.
Please don't.
I won't.
Because I really want you to.
Now let's go back to the focus of your collection.
You'll meet Gloria and the whole thing and the grand.
I might even bring my wife down.
Please.
That would be wonderful.
I would love it.
I will make reservations.
We'll pick a date that's convenient for you.
Arthur left to my description.
The only reason we collect, I can collect.
Madly.
I mean, to my level.
Remember, I was paying $10 a week and I was paying $50 a month.
because you have to buy it, and you buy it whatever level you have.
Do you buy duplicate copies and things?
I have duplicate copies.
You're not supposed to, but I do.
I've got four copies of Island Garden.
Sure.
Yes.
I've got all the illustrations.
I've got all the books.
Every book that Charles Hassan has.
Island Garden Hassan's.
Yes.
I had one of the original drawings from Island Garden and sold it a few years ago.
What a shame.
You could not have done that.
I know.
Now that I know you do.
Hassan is way up there.
When you come to my home, I have the greatest Hassan in the world.
I have a Hassan that's kind of like him.
I have a Hassan that's bigger than this.
Come on.
Oh, yeah.
This Hassan.
This Hassan was his most pivotal picture.
It was called Rue Bonaparte.
It was done in Paris.
It was his pivotal picture when he was moving from realism into impressions.
Phenomenal piece.
I am the person responsible for this.
He's doing the book on it.
He's doing Hassan's resume right now.
He is?
Stuart is the leading authority on Hassan.
He's here in town?
Oh, it's the finest American art gallery in the country.
Finest American art gallery in the country.
I've got a few Hassan things.
I'll mention my name.
I will.
I've got one book which has Hassan lithographs that is so early.
According to the guy who did the impressionism book.
I have the complete woodcuts.
Well, I should, yeah.
I have the complete woodcuts of Homer's, uh, I have Homer's woodcuts from the, uh, Harper's Weekend, all of them, every one of them.
Do you have the ones from Belouse, Victoria?
Every Saturday?
Do you?
Yeah, I don't have any of the others.
Every Saturday, St.
Nicholas, Belouse, I don't have, I have all the ones, uh, every one of them.
I get the very first wood engraving he ever did with Belouse.
I have a wonderful collection of Homer.
I love Homer.
He is spectacular.
This is delicious, isn't it?
Oh, yes.
Would I lie?
What were we talking about about the books?
Again, focus, focus.
We were just talking about how you enjoyed it.
Oh, yeah.
To me, I can't explain it to you, but everything I own, or don't own, a book, to me, is referential.
It's holy, in a way, I guess.
It's hard to explain.
I guess it goes back to my uncle, who was a great...
Great bookworm, a bibliophile.
Jerome Iver, B-I-V-E-R.
My uncle lived with us as a kid.
And he used to go down.
His great pleasure was in 4th Avenue bookshops.
Did he introduce you to this then?
He introduced me to it, yes.
And he collected philosophy, sociology, and fantasy.
He was reading Tolkien when Tolkien was first published.
Dave and Volkney, great science fiction writers,
the time they were publishing and collecting their books his world really was uh philosophy science sociology mathematics and he collected all the great writers was his collection good well it wasn't antiquarian it was uh it was contemporary
He would shave all the dust jackets by taking them off.
I love that.
And once told me, which I've never been able to prove, but sounds right, that in the earlier days, dust jackets were obviously meaningless.
They threw them away.
They threw them away, and a library had to be standard.
And if you had no dust jackets, there was more of a standardization than if you had some dust jackets and no dust jackets.
I mean, people used to take them and throw them away, but I don't know how anybody could do that, because there is very interesting ephemeral information on a test jacket.
You should be able to recognize that.
You'd think people would recognize that.
Well, there's no reason for that.
Only in America, in England, in England,
The original dust jackets in England and America had nothing on them but the title.
They were just rappers.
And in England, almost to this day, well, not to this day, it's changed after the Second World War.
But after the Second World War, if you look at most of the books, there's very little information on the dust jacket on English books.
Isar Kipling Kim.
And all it was was the title.
It's a cream-colored... That's right, you know.
And the guy wanted two grand for it, you know, but normally I pay much less.
I have Kim.
I got it for Zeppelin.
I found it in a... Those are the... You have to admit, I mean, you have... I witnessed you at an auction where you went to Heavy Heights and spent two million dollars for four printed books.
Really for one printer burger.
Really?
Actually for two.
The first and the third.
I have the second and the fourth.
Great copies.
So you're really in there for... I was in there for the first and the third.
Really for the first.
They're very interesting bindings, I have to say.
Yes.
And I'm very happy that I have this marvelous set because it has history.
It has a wonderful prominence.
Yes.
And to me, it's the penultimate, it's the penultimate print, it's the penultimate book in literature, set of books in literature, and something I would really not have a shout out again of this quality, because they will not come up at auction of this quality again.
Well, when's the last time a set of war came out?
You know, maybe 40 years.
I don't know the answer to that, but to continue.
Well, there will be another set being offered in catalog at Quarges.
Set I knew about.
In fact, it said that I helped discover.
It may even be that you were considering that.
I was considering that set.
in front of the auction but knew that that set was not as good and therefore i was going to take my chances and get the finest available set which is very important you're going to collect and you can afford it collect the best in the category you're going after when you went to that auction or to any auction you told me something earlier that i hadn't realized
is that it gives you a kick, the kind of kick that you used to get from gambling.
And do you mind if I say this, by the way, in my piece?
I thought that you enjoyed it.
I mean, there's nothing wrong with that.
I was at the Sands last week, and I'll estimate the first one would finish.
I'm a crapshooter.
I love boxing.
Hold on.
Do you go in with an idea that you're only going to allow yourself to spend so much?
I never have in my entire life.
I've never set a limit on what I was going to spend.
I never said to myself that this is worth $1,000 and I'll go to $1,000 or $1,200 or whatever.
But then I go and I look at a piece, and if I have to own it,
I will then go and see what it's going to go for.
If I want to spend the amount of money that it's going to go for, I go for it.
Why did you not get the Don Quixote then?
Because I saw what it was going for and felt that at $1.650 million, I didn't want it to go higher than that price to buy that book.
But I didn't set a price.
I just made it so clear.
In other words, if something is estimated... No, that was estimated at $200,000.
$200,000 to $300,000.
I said to myself, I know I'm going to spend more than $200,000 or $300,000.
Let's see what it goes for.
And I bid to $650,000.
Oh, you bid it to $650,000?
Oh, yeah.
And then... And I said...
Let those who want to buy it.
You know, and it really was worth a million six fifty.
No question it was worth it.
They undervalued that.
But you also performed a service in a way.
You realize that prior to that sale there was no copy of that in Spain?
Yes, I knew that too.
It was the only copy now in Spain.
I also knew that there was a Spanish collector who really wanted that book and was prepared to go.
I don't know what he was prepared to go for, but I knew he would spend.
Well, his commitment to that book was probably as great as your commitment to Shakespeare.
Exactly.
And I felt that Shakespeare was coming up.
So let's hold, you know, hang loose.
Hang loose, that's it.
The other thing... There's always another day.
There's also another reason.
This is interesting, by the way.
Yes, we are getting some insight into that.
Very important.
I was offered...
a set of Don Quixote in original vellum just less than one year ago for $150,000 coming in from Colombia supposedly purchased by a these two sisters who wanted to sell it rather
and a curator of one of the local museums in Columbia, South America, was coming up to sell it for them.
That's an interesting story.
Through a dealer friend of mine, who although is very knowledgeable in many books, his limits are 19th and 20th century, and he felt that
Although they looked good, someone from Quarge, who knew the books, who knows Darth Quixote, that's one book they have, should come and look at them.
And Quarge came as a favor, and unfortunately they were facsimiles.
In original film, but facsimiles, one of those early
Really early 19th century facsimiles.
But it's been a very good facsimile.
A fabulous facsimile.
A facsimile nonetheless.
Too worth owning, but only in that context.
Only in that context.
You know, like it would be worth owning some of the T.J.
Wise's things.
Exactly.
So having $150,000 in my head and seeing the $200,000 to $300,000 estimate and going to $650,000, I figured, uh, strawberries.
I'm sorry, raspberries.
Uh, no.
Uh, strawberries pretty good.
after seeing those prices 150 i thought i was going to spend two to three hundred that was estimate and going to 650 i figured i i did a yeoman job uh when i went for me in 650 i figured what the heck let them happen you were after the book of daniel i think i was after the book of daniel um and should have gone more i don't know why i hesitated i guess i uh i guess i felt that i was overpaying for it but without realizing that when is the next time i'm going to get an opportunity at a whole book
You see, I started thinking, what is it worth for Paige?
And that was the worst thing.
I'd never do that.
Now, were you thinking this as it's going on?
Yeah.
Do you have a double decaf espresso?
I'll have a black cup with caffeine.
I need my kicks like that.
And I guess I felt that...
I made a mistake.
I should have bought the... short of having a good version.
I wonder if you... I mean, so clearly there are things that you... Is covet too strong a word to use?
No.
A great collector or a good collector for covets.
But only to... But only in the best sense.
It's not a, uh, coveting in this sense is not a negative thing.
It's wonderful to want to acquire something that gives you pleasure, um, that should be owned by someone who will take care of it.
How large is your library, would you estimate, in your collection?
Well, it's all not antiquarian.
Some of it's modern books and then a lot of interesting but not valuable used books.
Probably about 5,000 books, but not all antiquarian.
Shady library is small.
You know, the Schattie Library is phenomenal.
My library is not Schattie.
I've never seen the Schattie Library.
What I'm saying is... I can imagine all of his books have a quality.
I have a phenomenal... The Aquarian collection is phenomenal.
But the Aquarian collection and the... Let me do it through this one.
Let's see.
The Aquarian collection and the contemporary collection.
And Aquarian, 19th century and modern books.
Not counting the used books.
uh would be about uh i never actually i think you gave me a number which is fine it's not 50 000 books it's like carter burden's at 80 90 000. he got himself born and i'm not asking you to talk about him by the way i know i've never really seen his collection so anything i'm telling you is it's it's third party but but uh
I hear that he wanted to collect American books from 1900 to the present time.
That's a wonderful conception.
It's a never-ending process because
There's too much being, there's too much that was printing, especially since the Second World War.
Unbelievable.
Well, it used to be, you know, the edition was sold 2,200 copies.
After the Second World War, you know, there's just 10,000, 20,000 copies of nothing no more.
What, what, what kind of that?
What happens when you, what, what is it about a first edition?
You know, Charles Lamb once said, people actually should collect 11 editions, they're probably hard to get.
You know, I mean, there's a point.
There's something wonderful about why the
work of an artist and by an artist I mean a writer the way he conceived it and the way he and his publisher put it together or his printer put it together and exactly how he saw it from the press for the first time everything else
It takes second place to the first conceptualization.
This goes to anything.
And why should a book be different?
I'll tell you how far that goes.
I'm trying to put together a collection that's much tougher to do, because there's never that much available of all the original manuscripts.
That's my next question.
Inevitably, the collector of first editions spoke through.
The writer said this to me, he collects.
Inevitably, if you're serious, you have to get into the menu.
Yes, there's no question.
Because what you're trying to do, and you just expressed it very eloquently, is that you're trying to get as close to the source of creation as you possibly can.
If I could find the original hand-printed copies, that the monks did, that's really what I would collect.
I've just gotten tremendously enthused in early Biblical manuscripts, especially how the New Testament came to be and how the Gospels, and how close are the Gospels that we read today, how close are those versions that we read today to how they were originally put down
And I became enamored of the Sinaiticus Bible, the Codex Sinaiticus, which Tischendorf discovered in the 1840s at the Monastery of St.
Catherine.
And I read everything I could about that and the history of how the New Testament came to be written.
And I'm only sorry that I got interested in that exactly one week.
One week.
after the most fabulous second century, third century, third century fragment from the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Romans.
And this had a slightly one word differential in the Epistle, in the fragment, different from the King James Version.
which changes slightly the meaning of that particular paragraph.
Because, as we know in translation, the New Testament is written in Greek.
And the Greek translating from the Greek by the early copyists, early monks, they made mistakes, although they tried not to.
The subtlety, the subtlety of the language.
The change of a word can change a whole concept.
So I got really into this there, reading all the scholarly works.
At an auction?
At a Sotheby auction.
and you missed it missed it went for 90 000 pounds uh in london uh and i missed it because i was i saw it and i wasn't interested in that i got interested in the whole subject a week later killing myself because i went into a library i'll never get out how long ago is this i guess it's about three years ago yeah so this this would be one of the you'd classify this is one of the things that got away this is one of the things that got away that i didn't even know got away after it got away
Because I wasn't interested in it at the time, and did get interested in it.
A week or two later, you probably could have gotten it, so I would have bought it for your question.
At whatever price.
The interest that happens is not more than whatever price.
I guess the question I was asking earlier... Is the earliest manuscript in private hands?
Think about it.
Except for the Egyptian stuff.
Yeah, when I was at Scheidings Library.
Yes.
This is a long way of getting to think.
Now, you were victorious with the Shakespeare's, and you must have felt a rush of satisfaction.
But how about also tell me about some of the victories that
that you get at clement you told me that you could go to every every book fair yeah and i knew enough to call and tell you i'd like to see you today because i knew you would be in town oh absolutely i knew that you would not allow yourself to go someplace on a deal because this is i truly consider myself a junkie when it comes to uh to book fairs
I love to peruse.
To me, I lose myself.
It's a great panacea.
It's wonderful therapy.
I literally get excited when you find something that they don't know about.
and you look around and you see, is this really the price?
Am I really going to be able to get this for 50 bucks or something like that?
Has that ever happened to you?
Well, in books, it's been rare.
It's interesting.
For me, in my antiquarian, in used books, I do it all the time.
I'm always finding books, titles that
I never thought I would find on a flea market or fair.
When it comes to antiquarian books, the other thing I collect, the other prerequisite to what I collect is it has to be in the finest condition possible.
And that you're not going to find except what the finest book there is.
You're not going to find it at... You're going to find them probably with the most reputable dealers in our major league office.
Exactly.
It's the only place.
So...
It's very rare to find a tremendous copy that fits all of my requirements.
So it's not just the book I'm looking for, it's the condition of the book.
Like real estate, location, location, location, condition.
You better really envy that guy who found Tamerlane.
Yes, I do.
I think it's the most wonderful thing in the world.
I keep looking at this.
I think it's fabulous what he did.
Do you know who he is, by the way?
His name was mentioned to me, but I don't know who he is.
John Marion said he did a commercial.
Yeah, I believe it.
He had just started to collect American imprints or something.
He was looking through the old boxes.
It's remarkable.
That could have been me.
How did that go up?
Of course, absolutely.
That could have been me.
For sure.
But, you know, I didn't mind paying what I paid for it because it's worth it.
That's right.
We don't have one in Massachusetts.
Are you kidding?
No.
No, Boston doesn't have one.
And Aquarian Society.
Actually, I think they were kind of in.
Don't tell Mark that I know this, but I think they were in that at $240K anyway.
Oh, sure, sure.
That's right.
Did you know that?
They went to $140K?
Yeah.
No, he's kept that a secret.
He wanted me to buy it for him.
I know the fish to fry in the town.
You're not going to put that in.
That's right.
You can leave it alone.
In fact, I shouldn't.
No, that's between you and I, so it's all.